The Owl Monkey

Owl monkeys are unusual because they are the only monkey in the world that sleeps during the day and forages by night. This causes them to have very large, round brown eyes. Males are basically the same size as females, with both weighing approximately 2.70 pounds. They all have thick gray fur with orange fur on their stomachs and under their arms and legs. The ones that live at higher elevations tend to have thicker fur than the ones that live at sea level. Owl Monkeys also have three distinctive black stripes on their heads.

There are two distinct types of Owl monkey which are separated by the area in which they live and the color of the fur on their necks. The gray-necked species have gray fur around their throats and live north of the Amazon River, in places like northern Columbia, Venezuela and Brazil. The red-necked species have red fur around their throats and live south of the Amazon River in areas including Paraguay, Argentina and southern Bolivia and Brazil.

Owl monkeys are frugivores, which means they eat a diet of fruit, insects, and plants. Although they prefer fruit, they can grab a moth right out of the air. They travel through the trees, starting about fifteen minutes after the sun has set, foraging and socializing with each other. They usually walk along branches on all four feet, but are also excellent leapers, able to jump almost twelve feet across from tree to tree.

They communicate with each other by squeaks and hisses. If they need to call from long distances, their voices can be amplified with sacs in their throats. After several hours of activity, they get tired around midnight and rest for about two hours then become very active once more. They forage and hunt again as they travel back home to their sleeping sites, or form new ones. At dawn they curl up in a tree to sleep, quite often in the same place as the night before.

Owl monkeys travel the furthest from their home on nights with more moonlight, and stay closer to home on nights that are darker. They do not have to compete with other primates for food, since they forage at night, and don’t have too many predators, since most carnivores don’t eat monkeys. They do need to look out for the occasional owl or snake.

Owl monkeys mate for life, and get very upset if separated from their partner. The male helps carry the young, who live in the family group until they are about three years old. Then they must start their own family group with a mate of their own.
